
Provine, Doris Marie. Unequal under Law : Race in the War on Drugs. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2007. Print.

Unequal Under Law by Marie Provine provides an in-depth examination of the relationship between law, segregation, and the continued presence of racism within the United States’s judicial system. The book focuses its analysis on the idea that the policies of the war on drugs have helped create a “racialized social system,” and more broadly how the justice system is utilized as a tool by which racial inequalities are perpetuated within American society. 

The first chapter opens with Provine’s analysis of the case of Edward James Clary, in which a judge deemed his mandatory ten year sentence for crack cocaine possession unfairly harsh and racially biased. Despite the judge’s efforts to challenge the policy, citing it as a violation of the 14th Amendment, higher courts overruled the decision and had Clary serve out his mandatory ten year sentence. Provine utilizes this case to paint a picture of American drug policy and explain how its design is rooted in diminishing racial minorities and maintaining societal inequality. In her argument, she discusses how mandatory minimums for crack possession disproportionately affect African American inner-city communities and points at the various other unequal consequences of the policy as examples of its racially biased nature. This gets at the deep-rooted and racist undertones of American drug policy and demonstrates the “implicit racial bias in legislating against crime associated with African Americans” (25) surrounding the war on drugs.

This chapter also describes the failure of these policies, presenting how they had minimal impact on the overall circulation of drugs but led to massive increases in incarceration rates. Provine cites the consequences of these incarcerations as a mechanism by which socioeconomic inequality is perpetuated amongst low-income and marginalized populations, using this to describe how modern racism has evolved to be less overt but remains embedded within the structure of law and society. In a further analysis of the evolution of racism, Provine discusses the notion that “most Americans have grown beyond the evils of overt racial malice, but still have not completely shed the deeply rooted cultural bias that differentiates” (26) and discusses the racialization of drug abuse and its leads to an “unconscious racial bias” (25) among policymakers, further leaning on the idea that drug policy is deliberately designed to be unequal.

Provine also discusses the notion that modern racism still manifests itself via “laissez-faire racism” (36). This form of racism is defined by negative stereotypes of African Americans, shifting blame for the socioeconomic gap between them and whites, and resistance to policies that could address systemic racial inequality. She iterates how this form of racism is wrapped in the ideology of color-blindness and refuses to address the systemic and historic inequalities created by entities at a federal level. She argues that nowhere is this more evident than in the evolution of American drug policy, which has consistently unfairly impacted racial minorities. As such, the chapter concludes by stating how understanding the racist roots of drug policy is crucial to addressing ongoing racial disparities within the United State’s criminal justice system.