[here](https://www.jstor.org/stable/26991040)
*****

This article argues that the process of reintegration for former prisoners is complex and stressful, leading many formerly incarcerated individuals into an unnecessary struggle on their way back to free society. 

The research centers around the personal accounts of 45 former inmates and their experiences with various public assistance agencies, welfare programs, and rehabilitative services. They describe how their daily lives are impacted by the several responsibilities they have to tend to as former prisoners, these include parole, curfews, etc.) and how they have to balance these other aspects of their lives. The titular “runaround” describes exactly this state, in which former prisoners are forced to structure their lives around their welfare bureaucracies or risk facing severe sanctions. The study cites that managing welfare bureaucracies is difficult due to their fragmented and inefficient nature. Inmates are often tasked with fulfilling several quotas by their programs, including attending rehabilitation programs, finding jobs, or participating in specific activities. Many of the interviewed former inmates cite their struggles in fulfilling these requirements, often due to them not being provided transportation, scheduling conflicts with their other responsibilities (like mandatory parole meetings), and their personal frustration with the system.

This study effectively outlines the struggles of reintegration for former inmates, particularly with how it presents personal accounts of various individuals, as well as the author’s own experiences as a member of a rehabilitation program. Keeping the small scope of this study in mind, this source could be used to outline the burden of being incarcerated when it comes to reassimilation. This source, however, does not describe large-scale trends and can not be used to make extensive claims about the effects of incarceration on large populations

