[here](https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/full/10.1177/0011128708328864)
***
This study aims to determine and quantify the relationship between the United State's stagnant poverty rate and the dramatic rise in incarceration rates over the past decades. Please note, that this study is not analyzing the mechanisms by which incarceration may create poverty, simply the macro relationship between the two.

The article opens by presenting the paradox between the drastic growth of the U.S. economy between the 1980s and 2010s, and the fact that poverty has decreased by a mere 0.3% percentage points. It discusses the various possible reasons behind this but focuses on the substantial 300% increase in incarceration rates between 1980 and 2004 *(they also briefly discuss how this is likely due to policy shifts and not increased rates in crime)*. From there, the study hypothesizes the various mechanisms by which increased incarceration rates could result in higher poverty rates. It discusses how higher incarceration  rates could result in lower rates poverty rates by artificially removing institutionalized populations (who are more likely to be from low-income populations) from surveys, how it may be a result of breadwinners being removed from their households, or how individuals with an incarceration record are less likely to obtain jobs.

Following this initial discussion, the article presents its analysis of incarceration rates and their effect on three poverty metrics. Their methodology is quite in-depth, but, in summary, they heavily utilize statistical models and employ empirical analysis to arrive at conclusions. The research found that increased incarceration rates are very likely to have lead to play a role in the persistence of poverty rates. Furthermore, their data suggests that had incarceration  rates not dramatically increased between 1980 and 2004, poverty would have decreased by more than 20% (2.8 percentage points), which would amount to millions less in poverty.

The paper concludes by suggesting where further studies could go to analyze the mechanism by which incarceration perpetuates poverty (like the ones discussed in the introduction), and by talking about how their findings suggest that considering incarceration when looking into poverty metrics is important. They also briefly touch on the idea of disproportionate rate of incarceration for specific minorities, which could play a part in their disproportionate representation within the impoverished population  

i.e. mass incarceration is *very likely* to create poverty